[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings".
Our body is equipped with
some amazing instruments
to perceive the world around us.
Through our senses of sight,
smell, hearing, taste,
and touch, we take in
energy and information 24/7.
Yet, we have barely scratched
the surface of our ability
to consciously perceive the
full spectrum of reality.
Is there a way for us
to sharpen our senses
and expand our awareness
of the world around us?
The answer is yes.
Through the science
of entrainment
and the proper use of
the correct inputs,
we can fine tune
our nervous system
and expand our ability
to perceive a greater
spectrum of our reality.
In season one of
"Mystery Teachings",
we explored how the
nature of our universe
is composed of vibrational
energies and frequencies.
We have many systems
and density levels
vibrating at various
frequency ranges
all interacting to form
the reality we perceive.
What happens when
vibrating systems interact?
When one vibrational
system comes into proximity
with another one
that has the capacity
to vibrate at the same
frequency range, over time
the two systems will
begin to vibrate
in sync with each other.
This phenomenon is
known as entrainment.
This principle of
entrainment was first
discovered by Dutch physicist
Christiaan Huygens in 1665.
He conducted an experiment
with pendulum clocks.
At the end of the day,
he had set the pendulums
all swinging at different
rates and times.
Then when he returned to
his workshop in the morning,
he'd find that they were all
swinging together in sync.
He ultimately
realized the source
of this entrainment phenomenon.
As the pendulum swings,
it pushes the air.
And those air molecules
create ripples,
like pressure waves
of air propagating
throughout the room.
These air molecules then push
against the other pendulums
in the room, creating
a modulating force.
And the result is an
alignment of the pendulums
until they're all
swinging at the same rate
and become in sync
with each other.
It creates a resonant
coherent system.
This is a broad
reaching discovery
that has informed many
applications of science
from bio-musicology to brainwave
entrainment, chronobiology,
hydrodynamics, and
physics to name a few.
Whenever we have any
vibrating system that
comes into proximity
with another system, that
has a potential to vibrate
at the same frequency range,
over time those two vibrations
will begin to entrain together.
We see this in
chronobiology, for example,
where our internal
system begins to align
with an external rhythm.
Like circadian
rhythms correlating
to the lunar and solar
cycles of night and day.
And then there's
the synchronization
of women's menstrual cycles
often governed by the moon.
We also see it in the
hibernation and migration
cycles of animals and much more.
In bio-musicology, they
apply the same principle
for sound healing.
This knowledge has
been used for thousands
of years within
shamanic societies
in the form of drumming and
didgeridoo, Tibetan singing
bowls, gongs, flutes, string
instruments, and so forth.
The modern applications
of brainwave entrainment
use specific frequencies
input into the ears
with a different frequency
coming into each ear.
This then forces the brain to
combine the sounds inside of it
over the corpus callosum that
connects the two hemispheres.
This combined signal
within the brain
forms a beat or a
rhythm that equals
the difference between the
two separate frequencies
being input.
These binaural beats
can then be tuned
to the desired
brainwave frequency
level, which then entrains
the brain into that state.
There are many ways this
principle shows up anytime
we're working with vibration.
Anything that vibrates
can be entrained.
The key is that the
strongest resonator will win.
For example, in the case
of the pendulum clocks,
while the clocks were originally
set to different swings,
some pendulums would be bigger
and heavier than others.
And the bigger ones
would generate more force
upon the air as they
swing, eventually
becoming the strongest
resonator and driving force
of the rest of the system,
causing it to all cohere
to its state.
And how can we harness this
phenomenon of entrainment
within ourselves?
When we talk about our own
vibrational entrainments,
we must first realize that there
are many frequencies we have
the potential to vibrate at.
We have a broad spectrum
of possible vibrations,
but there are three factors
to be most aware of.
The first is amplitude, meaning
the strength or magnitude
of the field that we emanate
or are exposing ourselves to.
The second is
coherence, which is
how laser focused we can
bring our particular state
of vibration and resonance into.
If we want to focus on
emanating the vibration of love,
the question is how
much can we really
come to that full state of being
and embody it, where everything
is focused solely and completely
on love with nothing else
in our awareness
or consciousness.
The third thing to be
aware of is duration,
meaning how long can we
hold that state of coherence
to make a sustained impact,
rather than just attaining it
for short bursts?
Methods like meditation, qigong
and other very ceremonial
practices help us train
ourselves to reach coherence
to hold our focus and
sustain it for longer periods
without getting
distractions in the way.
This is something we
only master over time
through daily practice.
The more we commit to and
develop such a practice,
the more it strengthens our
ability to impact and direct
the energies.
Not just feeling it inside,
but intentionally directing it
outwardly.
How can we bring
this into our lives?
When we train ourselves
to achieve coherence,
to sustain it, and develop
strength in our energy field,
as well as intentional control
of the energy we emit, that is
when we can really accomplish
Gandhi's notion of be
the change.
And that is when we can
also make a stronger impact
to truly change the world.
As a powerful resonator, we
can entrain our environment
and others around us
into a higher vibration.
We can be more masterful at the
influence we have upon others
who come into contact with us.
As we master ourselves
and our ability
to come into that coherence
with like the vibration of love
or inner peace, we become
a positive influence
wherever we go and with all
the people we encounter.
We can also create an
impact within the collective
through the connected field.
But for the most
part, most people
don't have enough control over
their thoughts, their emotions,
or their energy field.
It's similar to a
radio that is bouncing
from station to station.
And in the process, there
is static in the background.
In this digital age we
are bombarded by stimulus
and trained to constantly
be shifting our focus.
With social media,
sensationalized news,
thrill a minute video
games, and movies,
we are reacting to everything
based on emotion these days.
We share articles
based on headlines
without even taking the time
to fully read the content
or research and verify the
validity of what we're sharing.
And because of this,
people have ushered
in the post-truth society
of fake news and the like.
With this kind of static
and lack of coherence
within our minds
and energy field,
we will not be able to create a
coherent impact for ourselves,
let alone the world around us.
We must first learn to
harness and maintain
that coherent state
of peaceful emotion
and cultivate a quiet mind.
In Kabbalah, we call this
living the middle pillar, which
is like the eye of the storm.
There is all this
activity around us,
and it can seem chaotic, but
we're not caught up in it.
We're not caught
in the whirlwind.
We maintain balance and
centeredness and calmness.
This is coherence.
And the only way to get
there is to train ourselves.
It's not just going to
happen magically on its own.
It's not something
that is done to us.
We must strengthen our
will and train our mind
to become our ally,
not our enemy.
So how do we do this?
How did we come to
this level of mastery.
Beyond spiritual practices, like
meditation, qigong ceremony,
and ritual, there are ways
we can entrain our senses.
In learning to entrain our
senses into a coherent state,
we bring our nervous system
into a coherent state,
which also entrains the
brain into a coherent state.
In this way, we can approach
this from a spiritual practice
and also from a
physical practice.
Any long distance
runner knows that if we
want to go the
full distance, then
we need to find a good
rhythm, a cadence,
to find the rhythm of
our body and breath.
As we maintain that
rhythm, we then
reach a runner's high, so to
speak, and get into the groove
where we can go forever.
This is an example
of entrainment
into a coherent state
through physical activity.
With our five senses,
there are two things
we want to pay attention to.
First is coherence,
bringing ourselves
to focus on a single frequency.
Second is the range
of perception,
having a wider
range of frequencies
that we can tune
into and be aware of.
We have this huge potential
within our brain capacity
and sensory perception.
And we are currently
only perceiving
a small range of frequencies
within any of these systems.
Visually, we perceive
only the visible light
within the
electromagnetic spectrum.
Our auditory range is
about 10 octaves wide,
while our visual
is only one octave.
With our senses of
smell and taste,
we are accustomed and trained
to perceive certain ranges.
Our senses detect
a broader spectrum,
but our brain is only
consciously perceiving
a small percentage.
Our goal is to become
more conscious of what it
is that we are perceiving.
And one way to do this is by
training ourselves to have
focus and pay attention.
Bring our attention to the
details, not assuming anything.
Assumption is the
enemy of perception.
When it comes to expanding
the range of perception,
this is based on
training our senses
to become more aware
of the subtleties
that we aren't ordinarily
paying attention to.
We can stretch our
range of perception
like stretching our visual
range into the infrared
and the ultraviolet, maybe
even the X-ray range.
It is possible to stretch
our sensory range,
but it takes training
because we need to rewire
the brain and nervous system.
There is an evolutionary
reason for why we perceive
a certain range of frequencies.
But, for example, cats are much
better at seeing in the dark
than we are.
And we may notice dogs or cats
looking at something in the air
when we don't perceive anything.
Evolution has evolved
us with different ranges
of frequencies, but
that doesn't mean
we can't evolve further and
stretch into these greater
sensory perceptions.
Only when we start to
do both of these things
to broaden the
range of perception
and pay attention
becoming conscious
of the stimulus
coming in do we start
to become aware of more of
the true reality around us.
If we were to exercise
our senses for just 11
minutes a day, in
a matter of months
we could double our
conscious awareness
of our brain capacity.
But in order to ever
get to that level,
we need to earn it by
sustainably building our way up
to that level of perception
awareness by our own efforts,
unlike what is
depicted in the movies
or claimed in popular fads.
Our bodies are finely tuned
instruments of perception,
perceiving all the frequencies
coming into the system.
One of the ways we perceive is
through our physical senses,
but our bodies are
also perceiving
more subtle energies, energies
like the four elements--
magnetic energy, etheric
energy, auric energy,
and dimensional energies.
These subtle energies
and vibrations
are what the Western mystery
school tradition describes
as the five spiritual senses.
And we experience these through
our intuitive perceptions,
a clairaudience, clairvoyance,
and clairsentience.
We often describe
this perception
of a subtle energy fields as
intuition or the sixth sense.
But we can see these
energies are actually
all part of our physicality.
Like the pendulums
of Huygens' clocks,
our bodies perceive the
resonating frequencies
within our biofield.
We may not always be aware of
these vibrational frequencies,
but we all have the
ability to expand
our spiritual and physical
senses to begin to perceive
them more consciously.
It's simply a
matter of practice.
What are some simple exercises
for expanding our awareness
of the physical senses?
Let's explore this.
Within just a few months of
practicing these exercises,
we can double our
conscious awareness
of what we're perceiving.
We can shift from
maybe 10% consciousness
to 20% conscious awareness.
To open our visual
perception, it's really
about looking at the details.
Don't assume.
We tend to glance over things
and just get pieces of it,
and then the brain
fills in the details
through assumptions
and expectations.
To exercise this area of
perception, really look.
Pay attention to
all the details.
For example, see how far you
can perceive, like billboards,
for example, while driving.
See how far you can
make out the details.
Another exercise is to pick
an object across the room
and really look
closely at the details.
Then close the eyes and try
to recreate it in your mind.
See how many
details you can get.
Then after a little
while, open the eyes
and see what you missed.
Then take a piece of paper and
roll it up and look through it
like a telescope.
Gradually, move yourself
closer and closer to the object
until you're right
up next to it,
looking at all the details
and textures through the paper
telescope.
Then open your eyes and
look at it in a regular way
again up close.
Take in any other details.
Now, with that new
awareness of those details,
start backing up slowly,
holding your focus on the item
and return to a place where you
can sit and close your eyes,
and recreate the image in your
mind with all of the details.
Compare this to
your first attempt
at recreating the
image in your mind.
With this process, we're
focusing on detail,
not assuming anything
and retraining ourselves
to that awareness of detail.
By recreating the
image inside the mind,
this is also a way to start not
only training our visual sense,
but our clairvoyance
or inner vision.
We can do the same thing with
auditory processing to open up
our sense of hearing.
For the auditory exercise,
it's best to close the eyes
and pay attention to the sounds
in the room you're sitting in.
We start to, one by one, bring
our attention to every sound
that we can hear and
identify what it is.
Then we begin to expand
our perception of sound
and reach out and pay attention
to the sounds outside the room.
And then expand even
further to listening
to the sounds out on the street
or in the neighbor's apartment.
And we can then
start to bridge this
to our clairaudience or
inner hearing, where we also
start to engage
consciousness and maybe
active imagination a bit more.
So we imagine shifting
our focus of perception
as if we're hovering in
the air above our building.
And we take in all the
sounds within that vicinity.
Then we go higher and
higher until we're
hearing all the sounds
of the neighborhood.
And see how far we can take
this, how far we can expand.
Next, we start to
journey back in,
returning our attention
back to the neighborhood,
then back into the room.
And now, eliminating
the sounds one by one,
bringing our focus in.
Eliminate the sounds
in the room until we
are focused on only the
sound of our own heartbeat.
When we can get
to the place where
we are focused on the sound of
our own heartbeat and nothing
else, this will bring
us into coherence.
How about our sense of smell?
Well, to expand
our sense of smell,
we can work with a broad
range of essential oils,
identifying each one.
Start with the pure notes first,
such as mint versus cinnamon.
And later, move on towards
identifying the elements
within a blend.
We can do the same for taste,
working with different flavors.
Gather varieties of
fruits and spices.
And this is similar to
what food critics do
to train their
palate to recognize
all the different hints
and flavors within a dish.
We can also work with a
partner using a blindfold.
And one partner feeds the
other, which is pretty fun.
And through this, we
learn how to identify
the hints and the flavors
without relying upon our eyes.
How about with our
sense of touch?
Now, with touch, we can work
with different textures,
different objects, and try
to feel them and describe
them using our hands.
But to really test ourselves,
let's do this, for example.
Get three objects that are
the same size, weight, shape,
and smoothness.
For example, we could work with
a crystal ball, a glass ball,
and a ball of metal or
petrified wood, or maybe three
different types of
polished crystals.
Then when blindfolded,
we won't be
able to tell the difference
based on texture or weight,
but we can hold it
and feel the energy.
Each object is going to
have a different quality,
different vibration.
And we feel that through
the sense of touch
to help awaken clairsentience.
And as we do,
describe the qualities
that you get with each
of those feelings.
These are all methods
to expand our ability
to perceive the frequencies
that come in through our senses
and biofield through
dedicated practice.
To start, choose maybe one
sensory exercise to focus on.
Exercise it for 11 minutes a day
for 28 days or one moon cycle,
and then move on to the next.
Or we can also work
with all the senses,
each of them being 11
minutes per day per exercise.
And plan to spend then, if
you're going to do that,
about an hour to make
progress with multiple senses
at once within that
allotted time each day.
Once we've gotten good at
identifying specific notes
on a spectrum, for
example, identifying
specific essential oils out of
a variety, or specific tastes,
like a connoisseur, then we
can take it to the next level.
Once we've trained our
senses to recognize
these specific frequencies
related to different inputs,
the next step is
to attune ourselves
without the physical input.
What do I mean by that?
Well, for example, remember,
what does frankincense
feel like and smell like?
How did it feel when you were
interacting with it physically?
Recall it.
Remember it.
And by invoking that memory and
that feeling within ourselves,
we can, by will alone,
entrain ourselves back
to that frequency.
This is used in music a lot.
There is a saying that says what
goes in with music comes out
with music.
And one way we can apply
this is by putting music
on in the background
when we study.
When we need to take a test,
if we just then remember
the few notes of
that music that we
were using while studying
that particular subject,
then the information we
took in with that music
will start to flow into
our consciousness again.
Another example of this
is how we've all likely
experienced smelling a whiff of
a particular cologne or perfume
worn by someone we loved.
It instantly brings back
memories and feelings
of that person.
We can consciously
and intentionally
use these memories
of sensory input
to train ourselves into certain
states of being and attuning
our frequencies to that level.
But it only works if we've
been regular with our training,
or if there is a strong
emotional connection
to that memory.
Memory is based on repetition
and strong emotional
connections to a
particular event.
By recalling or imagining
the feeling in our body,
we can re-entrain ourselves, our
brain and our nervous system,
back to that state of
being kind of like a dream.
The brain doesn't actually know
the difference between a dream
and our outer reality.
It fires in the same way.
And it feels just as real.
Through active imagination,
with properly trained
senses and nervous system,
and being conscious
of how we felt in
certain states of being,
we can bring ourselves back
into any desired state of being.
We can use our will
to shift ourselves
on that spectrum of
frequencies until we
bring ourselves fully into a
coherent state of our desire.
Let's take a closer look
at the spiritual senses.
How do these intuitive
or spiritual senses
fit in with our
scientific understanding
of the human energy field?
In modern day terminology,
we call it the biofield.
And the biofield consists of the
aura, electromagnetic energy,
and bio-photons, which
is basically light.
We also have ionic
and magnetic energies,
which come from the charge of
the atoms within our bodies.
Anytime there is
an electric charge,
and that charge
starts to move, it
will create a magnetic field.
An example of ionic
electromagnetic energy
is when we slap our hands
together really hard.
Let me show you.
And then we rub them together,
build up heat and friction,
and then slow down, and start to
gently glide the hands past one
another, not touching.
Slowly moving them
back and forth
and feel that
magnetic pull and push
as they glide past each other.
We can also expand
it and contract it.
And feel where you hit
that push and that pull.
This is magnetic energy.
So what we've done is
we've ionized our hands,
rushing all the
blood into our hands
by clapping, and then rubbing
really fast and furious ionizes
the atoms on the skin.
This creates an electromagnetic
charge between our hands.
We feel the energy
field we created.
This is the basis of what
we call polarity therapy.
And this is an experience
of the physics.
It is energy.
And yet, it's real.
We're not just imagining things.
This is real biophysical energy.
Our energy body or biofield is
just as complex and intricate
as the inside of
our physical body.
In metaphysics, we first say
that the physical density
itself is made of
the four elements.
In our modern
terminology, we could
compare these four elements
of earth, water, air, fire
to the elements of life,
hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen,
and carbon.
Our bodies are made of these
four elements primarily.
Or we could go deeper
into the atomic level
and compare it to protons,
neutrons, electrons,
and photons.
However we want to arrange
it and at whatever scale,
we can relate the
physical density
with these four components.
Within our energy field, we also
have these physical energies
of what we call the
four elements as well.
They extend off her body
about three feet out,
about as far as our arms
will reach out from the body.
And in addition to the
flow of the four elements
out to three feet, we
also have magnetic energy.
Magnetic energy as any
time light or photons
hit the four elements
of the physical density.
This creates an
electromagnetic field
around that physical density.
The light is interacting
with the electrons
of the physical body, moving
them causing a magnetic field.
One way we can look at
electromagnetic energy
is through EEG and
MEG devices today.
Measuring the electromagnetic
energies, for example,
of the brain and the heart.
The heart is the strongest
generator of the magnetic field
within our body.
It's constantly pumping
blood and ions through it.
It's in constant motion.
While the brain is working more
with electrical connections
between the neurons.
The heart creates
an energetic field,
which can be detected up
to at least three feet
in any direction, and some
sources say even further.
These are things we can become
aware of and start to perceive.
So how do we start attuning
ourselves to better perceive
these energies within
the biofield and our aura
to activate and
strengthen these energies?
We're talking about five
spiritual senses here.
So let me repeat what those five
are again, just to be clear.
We have the four elements,
the magnetic energies,
the etheric energies, the
aura, and the dimensions.
Let's start with
the four elements.
To activate and
become more in tune
with these four
elements within us,
we can begin by
turning ourselves
in to an experience
of these four elements
by imagining ourselves,
for example, on the beach.
We can feel and bathe
in those elements
through meditations
and visualizations
to create an inner experience
of the four elements.
The other key when working
with the four elements
is to ensure that they are
in balance with each other,
both within ourselves
and our environment,
rather than having one in
excess over the others.
How about magnetic energies?
Well, to exercise our
awareness of magnetic energies,
we look for anything
that has activity
that involves polarity.
And then we work to
harmonize the polarity.
So an example like that
of clapping our hands
and rubbing them really fast
to feel the energy, that
is one way to work with it.
Also, though, activities that
engage the right and left
hemispheres of our brain working
together in a harmonic way.
So for example, things like
playing chess and strategy
games or listening to
classical music, also movements
like qigong and Tai Chi.
All of these are activities
that activate magnetic energy
within the brain,
harmonizing the hemispheres.
Magnetic energy
is about movement.
So any kind of exercises, like
walking or bilateral movement
or running, these
movements in the body
generate magnetic energy.
What about etheric energies?
How can we activate these?
Etheric energy relates to our
will and how we flow our will.
But it's not just
about our will.
It's the will of
the human collective
and the will of nature
and the universe,
as well as the will
of spirit or source.
One question to consider is
how do we strengthen our will.
This is done by having
a good practice.
And every time that
we exercise our choice
to do our meditations,
our spiritual practice,
our rituals, this is
an exercise of will.
There is always a
lower will of the ego
battling it out with the
higher will of our higher
self or spirit.
And every time we do the
good work and the practices
of aligning with our higher
self, our spiritual practice,
we are strengthening
our higher will.
On the other hand, every
time we're feeding the ego,
falling into its
resistance and its excuses,
we're strengthening the
ego's hold on our will.
If our intention is to
reach our full potential
and master ourselves,
that is our higher will
that we want to feed through
a daily spiritual practice.
It will help awaken our gifts
and our innate capacities.
The will of the divine is
to progress and to realize
our full potential.
Meditation is also
key to activating
our etheric energies.
Our etheric energy is
related to that zero point
field of quantum physics.
We tap into the zero point
field through stillness,
through the quiet pond,
accessing the gap,
and coming into
a coherent state.
Through this
practice, we can tap
into the higher vibrations
of etheric energies
coming in from divine source.
We allow that to fill us and
recalibrate us, realign us
to that divine flow and will.
Now, how do we harness our aura?
The aura is the field
of energy flowing down
through the seven chakras
and then out into seven
layers around us.
Using practices like
Tai Chi or qigong,
we can flow the energy
through those movements.
And as we do,
imagine and be aware
of it flowing through
the whole aura, not just
our immediate space, but
all the way out to 50 feet.
Spiritual rituals also call in
energy from spiritual realms.
And they call this into the
physical world through us.
We have many of these practices
within the universal Kabbalah
and mystery school tradition.
And as we become
aware of our aura,
we can discern these energies
flowing through our aura
and our entire energy field.
And we can bring our field
into greater coherence
with these spiritual energies.
Now, the final of the
five spiritual senses
is what we call
dimensional energies.
We can activate the
dimensions, first,
by realizing that we are
multidimensional beings.
This is a topic we explored
extensively in season one.
And through expanded
states of consciousness,
we stretch our awareness
to realize more
of our multi-dimensionality.
Expanding our consciousness
through meditation,
through working with the tree of
life, through sacred geometry,
building up to higher and
higher dimensional models,
and visualizing those
things around us.
As well, we can use the
technique of astral travel.
And we can consciously
direct our awareness out
of the body to higher
dimensions or frequency levels.
These are all ways
to train our ability
to perceive dimensional energy.
And just as with the
exercises for expanding
our physical senses, we can
work with these activities
to enhance our spiritual senses
by doing them 11 minutes a day
each and begin to
perceive more as we do.
Consistency of a regular
practice is the key.
And through these exercises
to activate and expand
both the physical
and spiritual senses,
we are entraining the nervous
system and the physical senses
to tune into the
biofield and perceive
with our spiritual senses, as
well as our physical senses.
We become more aware.
We use our brain capacity
to more consciously perceive
what's really going on around
us, physically and spiritually.
This helps to awaken our innate
gifts, the gifts of the spirit,
gifts of the soul, and
the gifts of the body.
As we awaken these gifts, we
begin to harness and access
more of our
potential and ability
to direct those
gifts with our will.
Join me again as
we discover more
of how we process and perceive
energy and information
so that we can gain greater
self mastery in our lives.
I'm Dr. Teresa Bullard.
Thank you for
exploring the mysteries
of our human potential with
me in this episode of "Mystery
Teachings".
[MUSIC PLAYING]